a star the size of our sun
can shine for about 10 billion years
specifically
our lovely sun is about 4.5 billion
years old
and has already burned half its fuel
the next stage in a star's life comes
when it runs out of juice
internal pressure drops but gravity
continues to press
at some point a star simply collapses
under its own weight and shrinks to the
size of its core
at the speed of almost a quarter of the
speed of light
in less than half a second a huge star
turns into a small
and dense object this rapid collapse
creates incredible shock waves that
cause the upper layers of the star
to explode
now an incredible amount of energy and
matter
is thrown into outer space at this
moment
luminosity of the star increases
millions
or even billions of times this is the
flash that our scientists can see
with super powerful telescopes but the
light from this explosion
doesn't reach our planet until many
years later
so in fact this star has long since
faded
there are several options at this point
it all depends
on the size of the star if its mass is
small
about the mass of our sun then for
several months
this flash will become brighter and
brighter until it reaches its peak
then the energy of the explosion will
begin to dissipate
gradually fading and cooling down a few
years will pass
and the temperature of the former star
will match that of space
and it will simply cease to exist
but the heavier the star the more
interesting the events will be
heavy stars burn their fuel too quickly
and have a much shorter life span
stars weighing about eight masses of the
sun can collapse
into a rather unusual object which is
rarely found in the universe
a neutron star
this dull ball is only 6 to 12 miles
wide
and covered with a hard metal crust
about half a mile
thick neutron stars can weigh about two
suns and have a strong gravity force
if you feel comfortable and in good
shape on earth
you wouldn't even be able to lift a
needle or a match
here what's more you would be pressed to
the surface
like a pancake and just unable to move
but there are stars dozens of times
heavier than the sun
an explosion of such a supernova which
weighs at least 40 times more than the
sun
gives birth to the most inexplicable and
mysterious object in the universe
a black hole at first an incredibly
bright explosion occurs
a shock wave spreads carrying dust and
matter of the former star
around like a fog and at the place of
the explosion
only a small black disk is left this
black abyss
is the heaviest object in the universe
it's so heavy that its gravity curves
space time around it
yes the closer you are to a black hole
the slower time will go for you if you
could get close enough to one of them
spend a couple of minutes in its orbit
and return to earth
you would simply not recognize your home
one minute near a black hole
can be a month a year or a decade on
earth
this depends on how heavy the black hole
is
but don't get too close the force of its
gravity is so strong
that even light can't escape from it
humanity also knows about the existence
of supermassive black holes
they gradually build up their mass
feeding on different cosmic objects just
like a predator
usually such super massive black holes
lie in the centers of galaxies and their
gravity is so
strong they can hold countless stars
near them
most people imagine a black hole to be a
starving monster
with a gravitational pull so strong that
nothing
including light can escape it as soon as
something
reaches the event horizon aka the point
of no return
there's no way back but then how about
information quantum physics which
describes how everything in the world
works
claims that nothing can destroy data but
if this
nothing includes black holes well then
we have a paradox on our hands
that's when stephen hawking came up with
a new idea
can it be that black holes don't have
event horizons
instead they may have apparent horizons
those can only trap stuff for some time
after that
matter or energy will escape but in a
different form
it means that black holes won't be able
to wipe information
just change it if this theory is true
and there's no event horizon then there
are no black holes as we know them
is there going to be a big crunch a big
rip or a big freeze
yeah i know where you can get a big gulp
many astronomers agree that the universe
might end some 2.8 to 22 billion years
from now
if the universe is expanding and it is
it means
it was born from a much more compact
state like rhode island
and if it does have a beginning it's
likely to come to an end
too but scientists can't agree on the
way it'll happen
one of the most popular theories is a
big crunch
not captain crunch once the growth of
the universe slows down to a crawl
the gravity will become the main force
it'll make the universe shrink
causing planets stars and galaxies to
collide with one another
it'll be the big bang in reverse with
everything collapsing in on itself
a trip to the nearest star apart from
the sun would take you
five million years on a commercial
airplane that's what i call a
long haul flight it would take you about
a hundred thousand years to travel from
one
end of our milky way galaxy to the other
at the speed of light
on a plane that's just too many zeros to
fit into a single
screen the sun can fit about a million
earths inside it but there's a star
called uy
scooty that's about 1700 times larger
than the sun
almost everything in space is connected
with everything else by gravity
star systems are part of galaxies
galaxies are part of clusters
and clusters are parts of superclusters
the largest known supercluster in the
universe is the hercules corona borealis
great wall
that's a name it's more than 10 billion
light years wide
mars has the largest natural formations
in the solar system
the mountain three times taller than
everest the canyon
almost seven times longer than the grand
canyon and the crater that could fit
half the amazon river across it
although the big bang theory is the most
viable one researchers still find
evidence against it
for example one theory suggests there's
an axis
around which the whole universe rotates
it's aptly named
the axis of evil there's a supermassive
black hole at the center of almost every
major galaxy
including ours black holes can attract
not only stars and planets
but also other black holes eventually
merging and becoming one with
a much greater mass the spinning
movement and enormous gravity of black
holes
sometimes makes it throw jets of matter
into space
traveling at almost the speed of light
there's a thing called the great
attractor it's a gravitational anomaly
outside our galaxy that can't be seen
but is known to attract the milky way
and lots of other galaxies toward itself
the winds on neptune reach the speeds of
1600 miles per hour
that's three times faster than a
commercial airplane
temperatures at the moon's south pole
reach minus 397 degrees fahrenheit
which just might be the coldest in the
entire solar system
saturn is less dense than water so if it
were thrown into a giant pool
it would float jupiter's moon europa is
covered in a thick layer
of ice but underneath it is a vast ocean
of water
measuring up to 100 miles deep
water ice was previously thought to be
rare and only common for earth
but it can in fact be found all over the
solar system
even on mercury and the moon
saturn's magnificent rings are a belt of
space debris
that formed after one of its moons fell
apart
jupiter neptune and uranus also have
rings
although not as splendidly as saturn's
and even some asteroids have them too
there are eight confirmed planets in the
solar system
but evidence shows there can be a ninth
we just
haven't discovered it yet organic matter
could have been brought to earth by
comets
since it has been found on several of
them
saturn also has a never-ending storm
just like jupiter
but it's also peculiar for its shape it
has
six distinct sides
mercury and venus are the only planets
in the solar system
that have no known moons
jupiter has 79 known moons orbiting it
the largest of which is ganymede and
it's bigger than mercury
it was thought that the milky way is a
belt before
but now we know it's a spiral galaxy
footprints on the moon can't disappear
because there's no wind to blow them off
the surface
there's a theoretical possibility of a
white hole
the reverse of a black hole nothing can
enter it from outside
but light and matter can escape from
within it
triton a neptune's moon orbits the
planet in a backwards motion
it's the only moon that does so and
nobody knows why
although there are trillions of stars in
space we can only see a tiny fraction of
them in the sky
cheryl pluto's moon is half the size of
its planet
which is why pluto orbits a bit around a
spot
outside its own axis all the objects in
space
including planets interstellar dust and
whole galaxies
comprise just about four percent of the
universe
the rest is dark matter and dark energy
that can't be seen
and isn't fully understood you won't be
able to wear a hat on venus
ever and just try to stand on your feet
the planet is insanely windy its upper
winds blow
50 times faster than the planet rotates
what's more these fierce winds never
stop and can get even
stronger with time wanna get away
you'll have to travel 11 billion miles
away from earth before ever leaving the
solar system
take your google maps with you you
probably heard of methane gas
a byproduct of natural processes such as
volcanic activity
and cows anyway this gas is not
only a part of the martian atmosphere
but also the thing that confuses
astronomers to no
end the thing is that the volume of
methane on mars keeps wavering
and scientists just can't figure out
where it might be coming from can there
be cows on mars
as you may remember pluto used to be a
planet
but was stripped of this title in 2006
later it was reclassified as a dwarf
planet
gee make up your mind but the most
unexpected fact about this celestial
body
is that its diameter is smaller than
that of the us
see for yourself the greatest distance
across the country
from maine to northern california is
about 2 800 miles
as for pluto it's only 1473 miles across
in fact if you laid pluto right down in
the middle of the united states
it crushed the heck out of iowa kansas
and nebraska
bad idea the planet uranus or
uranus you can't win either way rotates
on its side
and astronomers have no idea why the
planet has chosen such an unusual
position
the culprits could be ancient
mega-powerful collisions
but so far it's just a theory by the way
this is the only planet laying on its
side
our sun is insanely massive want some
proof
well 99.86 percent of all the mass in
the solar system
is in the mass of the sun in particular
the hydrogen and helium it's made of
the remaining 0.14 percent is mostly the
mass of the solar system's
eight planets
outer space isn't a perfect vacuum it
contains
not only stars and planets but also
clouds of interstellar dust
space plasma and cosmic rays those are
atom fragments dashing
from the outskirts of the solar system
one phenomenon people should be worried
about while exploring space
is cold welding if two pieces of the
same kind of metal touch in space
they bond and get permanently stuck
together
it doesn't happen on earth since water
and air keep pieces separate
astronauts onboard the international
space station don't use their feet to
walk
they float around so in orbit the skin
on their feet becomes very soft
and starts to peel off that's why they
have to take their socks off very
carefully
otherwise skin cells will break free and
float around
in the almost weightless environment
earthquakes
on the moon or more correctly moonquakes
aren't something from science fiction
they don't occur as often as on our
planet
and when they do it happens closer to
the center of the satellite
scientists think moonquakes might be
caused by the gravity of earth and the
sun
one of the moons of saturn rhea might
have a ring system
consisting of three narrow bands if
astronomers manage to confirm it
it'll be the first time people
discovered rings around a moon
hey that's nothing i've had rings around
my collar for years
normal visible matter for example
planets and stars
makes up just five percent of the
universe
the rest consists of invisible dark
energy that's 68 percent
and dark matter about 27 percent
add it up and there's 95 percent of
space
we know nothing about in its darkest
areas
space is freezing cold minus 454 degrees
fahrenheit
but try orbiting earth in the sunlight
and you'll understand how scorching 250
degrees feel
that's one of the reasons astronaut
spacesuits are white
this color is the best to reflect the
heat from the sun
[Music]
about 700 million years ago i wasn't
around then
a mysterious event that occurred may
have turned venus into the place it is
now
admittedly astronomers can't see the
surface of the planet directly
because it's covered with dense layers
of thick clouds
but space missions that have been sent
to the hot planet found that venus is
peppered with fire breathing
volcanoes massive mountains countless
craters
and gigantic lava plains
the temperatures on the planet are so
incredibly high
that they could melt lead and the
atmospheric pressure is so immense
that it would instantly crush any living
being reckless enough to set foot on it
if that's not enough the atmosphere of
the planet is filled with
noxious clouds of sulfuric acid which
smells worse than rotten eggs
carbon dioxide the main component of
venus's atmosphere
along with the infamous sulfuric acid
creates a powerful greenhouse effect
as a result the lower atmosphere and the
surface of the planet
are some of the hottest places in the
whole solar system
but the newest scientific theory claims
that venus could have had a pleasant
stable climate for billions of years
before something went wrong astronomers
did thorough research
and build a model of a virtualized
venus-like world
this model demonstrated that for most of
its history the hot planet had oceans
with liquid water
adequate temperatures and stable
tectonic plates
in fact the planet resembled earth as it
used to be at the beginning of its life
scientists suppose that this period of
earth-like development could have lasted
for more than
three billion years so during that time
the planet was most likely covered with
oceans which were from
30 to 1 000 feet deep also
some water was locked in the soil of the
planet on top of that
venus had stable temperatures of 68 to
122 degrees fahrenheit
which you have to admit it were quite
pleasant
and not that different from the
temperatures on earth nowadays
so what i'm getting at is that for 3
billion years
right until something irrevocable
happened 700 million years ago
venus could have been habitable